Add docs for clickhouse-c language client (#6353)
ClickHouse/clickhouse-docs: docs/integrations/language-clients/c.md

---
sidebar_label: 'C'
sidebar_position: 25
keywords: ['c', 'native protocol', 'native format', 'header-only', 'embedded', 'tcp', 'block decode']
slug: /integrations/c
description: 'Header-only C client for the ClickHouse native protocol, designed for embedding.'
title: 'ClickHouse C client'
doc_type: 'reference'
---

`clickhouse-c` is a header-only C client for the ClickHouse [native protocol](/interfaces/tcp).
The source and per-header reference are in the [GitHub repository](https://github.com/ClickHouse/clickhouse-c).

Unlike the higher-level clients, it does little for you on purpose. The core header decodes and
encodes [Native](/interfaces/formats/Native) format blocks over an I/O callback you supply. You own
the socket, TLS context, allocator, retries, and connection pooling. That makes it small enough to
embed: including `clickhouse.h` alone pulls in no link-time dependencies beyond libc.

:::note
Library is under active development. v1 decodes core ClickHouse types.
Report limitations or missing functionality through the [issue tracker](https://github.com/ClickHouse/clickhouse-c/issues).

> Understand however that this library is missing functionality by design.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This library is under active development. v1 decodes core ClickHouse types.
Report limitations or missing functionality through the [issue tracker](https://github.com/ClickHouse/clickhouse-c/issues).
Understand however that this library is missing functionality by design.
```

| [`clickhouse-client.h`](https://github.com/ClickHouse/clickhouse-c/blob/main/doc/clickhouse-client.md) | TCP packet loop: Hello, Query, Data, EndOfStream, Exception, Progress, Pong | — |
| [`clickhouse-async.h`](https://github.com/ClickHouse/clickhouse-c/blob/main/doc/clickhouse-async.md) | Ioless client: the same packet loop driven by caller byte submission, no socket | — |
| [`clickhouse-compression.h`](https://github.com/ClickHouse/clickhouse-c/blob/main/doc/clickhouse-compression.md) | Compressed-frame layout, CityHash128, codec dispatch, and `LZ4`/`ZSTD` adapters | `-llz4 -lzstd` |
| [`clickhouse-posix-io.h`](https://github.com/ClickHouse/clickhouse-c/blob/main/doc/clickhouse-posix-io.md) | I/O backend over blocking `read(2)`/`write(2)` | — |
| [`clickhouse-openssl.h`](https://github.com/ClickHouse/clickhouse-c/blob/main/doc/clickhouse-openssl.md) | I/O backend over `SSL_read`/`SSL_write` | `-lssl -lcrypto` |

## Required server setting {#server-setting}

The decoder reads printable type names from the wire, so the server must encode them as text:

```plaintext
output_format_native_encode_types_in_binary_format = 0
```

## Adding it to your project {#adding-to-project}

> There's no package to install, vendor the headers into your tree (a git submodule or a copy works).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There's no package to install, so you should vendor the headers into your tree via a git submodule or a copy.
```

- `JSON` and `Object('json')`, as `String` columns under string serialization (see below)

`JSON` and `Object('json')` decode only when the query sets `output_format_native_write_json_as_string=1`.
Each row arrives as one JSON document in a `CHC_COL_STRING` column, so the string accessors read it;
the builder writes the same shape with `chc_block_builder_append_json_string`. Any other JSON
serialization version returns `CHC_ERR_TYPE` naming the setting.

`Variant`, `Dynamic`, `AggregateFunction`, and `QBit` aren't yet decoded and return `CHC_ERR_TYPE`;
cast them to `String` server-side as a fallback.

## What the library doesn't do {#non-goals}

These are deliberate non-goals — handle them in your application or a sibling library:

- HTTP protocol. Wrap libcurl directly for the [HTTP interface](/interfaces/http).
- DNS resolution, endpoint failover, connection pooling, retry, and backoff.
- TLS context lifecycle. The OpenSSL backend uses an `SSL` you have already connected.
- Threading. Each `chc_client` is single-threaded by design.
- Async I/O inside the library. The blocking client calls `chc_io.read` synchronously. For an

>   event-loop client that performs no I/O itself, use the [ioless client](#async-client).

Reviewer: We could move this closer to the top of the doc next to the note about the library being under development
